- Preparation for an interview
begins the moment you decide to pursue a career
in software development.
That's because during an interview,
you're going to highlight your past achievements
and demonstrate the knowledge you've accumulated
since you started on this journey.
That body of work is preparation
that will continue through your career.
However, once an interview is scheduled,
your preparation shifts
to focus on how you can best present your achievements
and towards brushing up on your technical skills,
so they're sharp for the interview.
Let's talk through a few tips
that will help you get prepared.
Your first goal in an interview
should be to get comfortable.
Everyone's a little nervous going into an interview
but once you're comfortable,
that nervous energy turns into excitement.
So, make sure you arrive a little early, use the restroom,
and have a minute to take a few deep breaths
before you meet with the interviewer.
Then, start your interview with a smile,
greet your interviewer by name,
and then share a positive thought about your day.
This introduces some small talk before the actual questions,
which can help you settle any nerves
and get you even more comfortable
before facing the questions.
You'll also want to be prepared to answer common questions
that are used to kick off the interview.
Questions like, "Tell me about yourself."
"Why do you want to work here?"
and "What makes you qualified for this position?"
shouldn't come as a surprise to you.
And if you're prepared, you'll be even more comfortable
moving into the behavioral or technical questions.
The key to preparing for behavioral questions
is to master the art of storytelling.
Now, of course, these need to be stories
based on your actual experiences.
To start out, make a list of situations from your past
that showcase major achievements you're proud of,
areas where you excelled, had to solve a problem,
or learned an important lesson.
These are your stories for the interview,
so you'll want to make them a blend of situations
that highlight your technical abilities
and your personality.
Then for each story, fill in details
that describe the situation you faced,
the task you needed to complete,
the actions you took, and the results.
This is commonly referred to as the STAR method,
which is a structured approach
to answering behavioral interview questions.
For more technical stories,
jot down some of the tools and languages that you used
and do some research to brush up on each technology.
Try to focus on the technologies
listed in the job description
and do a round of research on common interview questions
that pertain to them.
Once you've filled in the details for each story,
you'll want to review the company's mission statement
to determine what's important to them.
Let's say they value teamwork, technical excellence,
innovation, and problem-solving.
These are likely to be focus points
for the interview questions.
So, you'll want to plan out
what aspects of your stories relate to these areas.
The best way to do this
is to create a matrix of your stories
and these potential questions.
Then within the matrix, add small reminders
of what you want to spotlight for each question.
After you've developed your stories
and mapped them to common interview questions,
you'll want to verbally practice them.
You can do this on your own
or enlist the help of a friend to do some mock interviewing.
The more you verbally practice your stories,
the more comfortable you'll be
telling them in the interview, which will lead to success
with behavioral interview questions.
For problem-based questions
that require you to write code or whiteboard,
the best strategy is to get plenty of hands-on practice
before your interview.
For coding assessments, you should complete
as many practice questions as possible
on sites like LeetCode or HackerRank
to build your familiarity
with common data structures and algorithms.
An even better approach
is to complete coding challenge courses on LinkedIn Learning
where you'll get a detailed explanation
from the instructor on how to solve a particular problem.
When practicing for these problems,
you'll want to speak through your approach out loud,
which will benefit you when you need to speak through them
in the interview.
During the actual interview,
always listen carefully to the initial problem,
ask questions to clarify it,
and pay attention to tips from the interviewer
that can keep you moving in the right direction.
Take time to speak through or draw out your solution
before you begin to write code
or pseudocode for the problem.
This helps demonstrate your problem-solving skills
and can identify problems with your approach
before you begin.
You'll also want to be prepared
to ask questions about the position
and what you'll be working on.
If you can identify the product you'll be working on
from the job description, do a round of research on it
and come prepared with some thoughtful questions
about how it works or how it's built.
If you really want a position,
make sure you put in the time and do your preparation.
It pays off and second chances are rare.
No matter what the outcome,
you'll be able to hold your head high,
knowing that you put your best foot forward.